The following is a conversation with Silvio McCauley, a computer scientist at MIT,
winner of the Turing Award, and one of the leading minds in the fields of cryptography,
information security, game theory, and most recently, cryptocurrency and the theoretical
foundations of a fully decentralized, secure, and scalable blockchain and Algorand,
a company of cryptographers, engineers, and mathematicians that he founded in 2017.
Quick mention of our sponsors, Athletic Greens Nutrition Drink, the Information InDepth Tech
Journalism website, FourSigmatic Mushroom Coffee, and BetterHelp Online Therapy. Click the sponsor
links to get a discount at the support of this podcast. As a side note, let me say that I will
be having many conversations this year on the topic of cryptocurrency. I am reading and thinking a
lot on this topic. I just recently finished reading the Bitcoin Standard, a book I highly
recommend. As always, with this podcast, I'm approaching it with an open mind, with compassion,
with as little ego as possible, and yes, with love. I hope you go along with me on this journey,
and don't judge me too harshly on any likely missteps. As usual, I will play devil's advocate,
I will, on purpose, sometimes ask simple, even dumb questions, all to try and explore the space
of ideas here with as much grace as I can muster. I have no financial interests here. I only have a
simple curiosity and a love for knowledge, especially about a set of technologies that may
very well transform the fabric of human civilization. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube,
review it, and have a podcast, follow on Spotify, support it on Patreon, or connect with me on
Twitter at Lex Freedman. And now, here's my conversation with Silvio McCauley.
Let's start with the big and the basic question. What is a blockchain, and why is it interesting,
why is it fascinating, why is it powerful? All right, so a blockchain, think of it, is really
a common database distributed, think about is a ledger in which everybody can write an entry
in a page, you can write, I can write, and everybody can read, and you have a guarantee
that everybody has the same copy of the ledger that is in front of you. So if whatever you see
on page seven, anyone else sees on page seven. So what is extraordinary about this is this
common knowledge thing that I think is really a first for humanity. I mean, if you look at
communication, like right now, you can communicate very quickly images of photos, but do you have a
certainty that whatever you have received has been received by everybody else? Not really.
And so this common knowledge and knowledge, and the certainty that everybody can write,
nobody has been prevented from having whatever they want. Nobody can erase, nobody can tear a page
of a ledger, nobody can swap page, nobody can change anything. And that is a immutable common
record is extremely powerful. And there's something fundamental that is decentralized about it. So
at least in spirit, some degree against maybe a resistance to centralization. Absolutely. If it is
not decentralized, how can it be common knowledge? If only one person or a few people have a ledger,
they only, you don't have a ledger, you have to ask, you know, what is on page seven, and how do
you know that whatever they tell you is on page seven, they tell the same thing to everybody
else. And so that is this common knowledge is extremely powerful, just to give you an example,
assume that you do an auction, okay, you have worked very hard, you build a building,
and now you want to auction off. Makes sense, because you want to auction worldwide,
better yet you want to organize the building and sell it in all in parcels.
Now, everybody sees the bids. And you know that everybody sees the bids, you and I see the same
bids, and so does everybody else. So you know that the fair price has reached, and you know, who wants
what and who has paid how much. And if you do it instead of a price in an essentialized system,
I put a bid say, oh, congratulations, Alex, you won. And your price is $12,570. So if instead of
is that common, the knowledge is a very powerful tool for humanity. So we return to it from a
bunch of different perspectives, including like a technical perspective, but you often talk about
blockchain and some of these concepts of decentralization, scalability, security,
all those kinds of things. But one of the most maybe impactful, exciting things that leverage the
blockchain, this kind of ledger idea of common knowledge is cryptocurrency. So in the financial
space. So is there, can you say in the same kind of basic way, what is cryptocurrency in the context
of this common knowledge in the context of the blockchain? Great. Cryptocurrency is a currency
that is on such a ledger. So imagine that on the ledger, right? Initially, you know that somehow,
say, you and I are the only owner, each one, let's give it ourselves a billion each of whatever
this unit. Then I start writing on the ledger, I give 100 of these units to my sister, you give
my, I give this much to my aunt. And then, and then now, because it's written on the ledger and everybody
can see my sister can give 57 of these units it should receive from me to somebody else.
And so, and that is money. And that is money because you can see that somebody who tenders
your payment has really the money there, right? You don't have any more of a doubt when you want
to sell an item. If I write your check, is the check covered? If I write or do I have the money
at the moment of a transaction? You really see, because the ledger is always updated, what you
see is what I see, what the merchant sees, you know that the money, so is the most powerful
money system there is because it is totally transparent. And so you know that you have
been paid and you know that the money is there, you have not to second guess anything else.
So the common knowledge applied there is you're basically mimicking the same kind of thing you
would get in the physical space, which is if you give a hundred bucks or a hundred of that thing,
whatever, of that cryptocurrency to your sister, the actual transfer is as real as you giving
like a basket of apples to your sister because so in the case in the physical space, the common
knowledge is in the physics of the atoms. And then it's digital space, the common knowledge
is in this ledger. And so that transfer holds the same kind of power, but now it's operating in
that digital space. Again, I apologize for a set of ridiculous questions, but you mentioned
cryptocurrencies of money. What is money? Why do we have money? Do you think about this
kind of from this high philosophical level at times of this tool, this idea that we
humans have all kind of came up with and seem to be using effectively to do stuff?
Money is a social construct, okay, in my opinion. And this has been somehow, people always felt
that somehow money is a way to allow us to transact even though we want to different things.
So I have two ships and then you have one cow. And I want the cow, but you are looking for blankets
instead. So to have money is really simplifies this. But at the end of it, that's why a bit was
invented. And you start with gold, you start with the coinage, then you start with the check.
But at the end of the day, money is essentially a social construct because you know that what
you receive, you can actually spend with somebody else. And so there is a kind of a social pact
and social belief that you have. At the end of the day, even a barter is of requires
these beliefs that other people are going to accept the quote unquote currency you offer them.
Because if I'm amazing and you ask me to build a wall in your field and I did.
And you, in exchange, you give me a fuzzenship. What am I going to do? Eat them all? No, I had to
feed them. And if I don't feed them the dye, my value is zero. So in receiving this livestock,
I must believe that somebody else will accept them in return for something else. So money is
this social belief, social shared belief system that makes people transact.
That's fascinating. I didn't even think about that. You have a deep network of beliefs about
how society operates. So the value is assigned even to sheep based on that everyone will continue
operating how they were previously operating. Somebody will feed the sheep. I didn't even think
about that. That's fascinating. So that directly transfers to the space of money and then to the
space of digital money, cryptocurrency. Okay. Does it bother you sort of intellectually when this
money that is a social construct is not directly tied to physical goods like gold, for example?
Not at all. Because after all, gold has some industrial value. Nobody delies it. It's a
metal. It doesn't oxidate. It has some good things about it. But does this industrial value really
represent the value to which it now is traded? No. So gold is another way to express our belief.
I give you an answer. Gold, you treat it like, oh, somebody else will want this for doing
something else. So it is really this notion of this. Money is a mental construct. It's really
an end. It's a shared. It's a social construct, I really believe. And so some people feel that it's
physical, so therefore gold exists. But then, as you know now, we, countries, most of us together
country right now, they print their own money and you believe that they are not going to
exaggerate it with inflation. Not everybody believes what I'm saying. There is at least
a not they're not going to exaggerate it blatantly. And therefore you receive it because you know that
somebody else who will accept it will have faith in the currency and so on and so forth.
But the weather is gold, whether it's livestock, whatever it is, money is really a shared belief.
So there is something, you know, and I've been reading more and more about different cryptocurrencies.
There is a kind of belief that the scarcity of a particular resource like Bitcoin has a limited
amount in its tied to physical, you know, to prefer work. So it's tied to physical reality
in terms of how much you can mine effectively and so on. That that's an important feature of money.
Do you think that's an important feature to be a part of what are the money is?
That is certainly a very useful part. So at some point in time, you know, assume that
money is something that all of a sudden we say, days is our money, our currency. Then,
you know, I offer you 10 days is in payment of whatever goods and services you want to provide.
But at the end of the day, if you know that you can cultivate it and generate them
at will, then perhaps, you know, you should not accept my payment. Here is a bouquet of days.
So you need some kind of a scarcity of the inability to create it suddenly out of nothing
is an important. And it's not an intrinsic necessity, but it's much easier to accept
once you know that there is a fixed number of units of whatever currency there is. And therefore,
you can mentally understand I'm getting, you know, this much of this piece of pie.
And therefore, I consider myself paid. I understand what I'm receiving.
You described the goals of a blockchain. You have a nice presentation on this as scalability,
security and decentralization. And you challenged the blockchain trilemma that claims you can only
have two of the three. So let's talk about each. What is scalability in the context of blockchain
and cryptocurrency? What does scalability mean? So remember, if we said that the blockchain is
a ledger, and each page receives that gets some transaction, and everybody can write in this
pages of a ledger, nobody can be stopped for writing and everybody can read them.
Okay, scalability means how fast can you write? Just imagine that you can write an entry in this
special shared ledger once every hour. Well, you know, what are you going to do if you have
one transaction per hour, the world doesn't go around. So you need to have scalability means
here that you can somehow write a lot of transaction, and then you can read them and
everybody can validate them. And that is the speed and the number of transactions per second,
and the fact that they are shared. So you want to have this speed, not only in writing, but in
sharing and inspection for validity. This is scalability. The world is big. The world wants
to interact with, the people want to interact with each other. And you better be prepared to
have a ledger in which you can write lots and lots and lots of transactions in this special way
very, very, very quickly. So maybe from a more mathematical perspective, or can we say something
about how much scalability is needed for a world that is big? Well, really depends how many
transactions you want. But remember that I think right now you have to go into at least
a thousandth of transactions per second. Even if you look at credit cards, we are going to go from
an average of 1600 to peaks of 20,000 or 40,000, something like this. But remember,
it's not only a question of the transaction per se, but the value is that the transaction
is actually being shared and visible to everybody. And the certainty that that is the case,
I can print on my own printer way more transactions that nobody has the time to see or to inspect,
that doesn't count, right? So you want scalability at this common knowledge level. That is the
challenge. I also meant from a perspective of like a complexity analysis. So when you get more
and more people involved, doesn't you just scale in some kind of way that... Do you like to see
certain kind of properties in order to say something is scalable? Oh, absolutely. I took a
little bit implicitly that the people transacting are actually very different. So if there is a
two people who can do fast and slow transactions per second with each other, this is not so
interesting. What we really need is to say there are billions of people at any point in time,
you know, thousands and thousands of them want to transact with each other and you want to support
that. So Algorand, it solves... So that's the company, the team of cryptographers and mathematicians,
engineers, so on, that challenged the blockchain trilemma. So let's break it down in terms of
achieving scalability. How do we achieve scalability in the space of blockchain, in the space of
cryptocurrency? Okay, so scalability, security, remember, and decentralization. So that's what
you want. What's the best way to approach? Can we break it down, let's start with scalability
and think about how do we achieve it? Well, to achieve it at one at a time is perhaps easy,
even security. If nobody transacts, nobody loses money. So that is secure, but it's not scalable.
So let me tell you, I'm a cryptographer, so I try to fight the bad guys and what you want is that
the vesselager that we discussed before cannot be tampered with. So you must think of it that
is a special link that nobody can erase. Then it has to be everybody should be able to read
and not to alter the pages or the content of the pages. That's okay. But you know what,
that is actually easy cryptographically. Easy cryptographically means you can use tools invented
50 years ago, which in cryptographic time is praistory, okay? We are cavemen working around
and solve their problem in cryptography land. But there is really a fundamental problem,
which is really almost a social seems a political problem is to say who the hell chooses or publishes
the next page on the ledger. I mean, that is really the challenge. This ledger, you can always add
a page because more and more transaction had to be written on there. And somebody has to assemble
this, this transaction put them on a page and add the next page. Who is the somebody who chooses
the page and adds it on who can be trusted to do it. Exactly. Assume it is me for what I'm being,
not that I won't volunteer for the job, but then I would have more power than any absolute monarchy
history because I would have tremendous power to say these are the transactions that the entire
world should see. And whatever I don't write, this transaction will never see the light of day.
I mean, no one had any such a power in history. So it's very important to do that. And that is
the quintessential problem in a blockchain. And people have thought about it to say it's not me,
it's not you. But for instance, in proof of work, what people say is okay, it's not me, it's not you.
You know what it is? We make a very difficult, invent a cryptographic puzzle very hard to solve.
The first one to solve it has the right to add one page to the ledger on behalf of everybody else.
That's always seems okay because, you know, sometimes I solve the puzzle before you do,
sometimes you solve before I do or before somebody else, somebody else solves it. It's okay.
And presumably the effort you put in is somehow correlated with how much trust
you should be given to add to the ledger. Yeah. So somehow you want to make sure that, you know,
you need to work because you want to prevent, you want to make sure that, you know,
you get one solution every 10 minutes to say, like in particular example of Bitcoin,
so that is very rare that two pages are added at the same time. Because if I solve the puzzle
at the same time you do, it could happen that if it happens once or twice, we can survive it.
But if it happens, you know, every other page, you know, is a double page, then which of the two
is the real page becomes a problem. So that's why in Bitcoin, it is important that to have
substantial amount of work so that no many, how many people try on earth to solve the puzzle,
you have one solution out of how many people are trying every 10 minutes so that you have,
you distanciate these pages and you have the time to propagate through the network a solution
and the page attached to it. And therefore there is one page at a time that is added.
And they say, well, why don't we do it? We have a solution. Well, first of all, a page every 10
minutes is not fast enough. It's a question of scalability. And second of all, to ensure that
no matter how many people try, you get one page every 10 minutes, one solution to the riddle
every 10 minutes, this means that the riddle becomes very, very hard. And to have a chance to
solve it within 10 minutes, you must have such an expensive apparatus in terms of specialized
computers, not one, not two, but a thousand and a thousand of them. And they produce tons of heat,
okay, they dissipate heat like maniac. And you need to refrigerate them too. And so then now you
have air conditioning, galore to add to the thing. It becomes so expensive that fewer and fewer
and fewer people can actually compete in order to add to the page. And the problem becomes so
so so crucial that you know, in in in Bitcoin, depending on which day of the week, look at it,
you are going to have two or three mining pools are really the ones capable of controlling the
chain. So you're saying that's that's almost like least centralization. Right. It started being
decentralized. And but the expenses become higher and higher and higher when the cost becomes higher
and higher, fewer and fewer people can afford them. And then, you know, it becomes de facto
centralized, right? Yeah. And in a different type of approach is instead, for instance, a delegated
proof of stake, which is also very easy to explain, essentially boils down to to say, well,
look at these 21 people say, OK, and don't they look honest? Yes, they do. In fact, I believe
that they're going to remain honest for the foreseeable future. So when do we do ourselves a
favor? Let's entrust them to add the page on behalf of all of us to the ledger. OK.
OK. But now we are going to say, is this centralized or decentralized? Well, 21 is better
than one, I have to say, is very little. So if you look at when people rebelled to centralized
power, I don't know, the French revolutions, OK, there was a monarch and the nobles. Yes.
Were there 21 nobles? No, there were thousands of them, but there were millions and millions of
disempowered citizens. So one is centralized, 21 is also centralized. So that's delegated
proof of stake. Delegated. Kind of like representative democracy, I guess. Yes, which is
good. It's working great, right? It's working great. Well, it's better than a monarch, right?
But there's problems. There are problems. And so we were looking for a different,
when thinking about Algorand for a different approach. And so we have an approach in that,
you know, is really, really decentralized because essentially it works as follows.
You have a bunch of tokens, right? These are the tokens that have equal power and you have,
say, 10 billions of tokens distributed to the entire world. And the owners, each token has a
chance to add the ledger equal probability of everybody else. In fact, actually, if you want,
here is how it works. So think about, you know, by some magic graphic process, which is not magic,
it's mathematics, but think of it the magic. Assume that you select a thousand tokens.
And so sometimes a random, okay, and you have a guarantee that we're going to select it.
And then the owners of these 1000 tokens somehow agree on the next page. They all sign it.
And that's the next page. Okay. So it is clear that, you know, nobody has the power, but you know,
you know, once in a while, one of your tokens is selected and you are in charge of this
committee to select the next page. But this goes around very quickly. So and if you look at this,
the question really is that it's not really centralized. And because of what, for agreeing
on the same page, it is important that the 1000 tokens that you randomly selected
are in honest ends, the majority of them. So which if the majority of the tokens are in honest ends,
that is essentially true. Because if the majority of the tokens are in honest ends, if you select,
say 90% of the people are 90% of the tokens are in honest ends. So can you randomly select
1000? In this 1000, you find the 501 tokens in bad ends. Very, very improbable. So basically,
when a large fraction of people are honest, then you can use randomness as a powerful tool to get
decentralization. So what does honesty mean? And now we're into the social side of things,
which is how do we know that like the fraction, the large fraction of people or participating
parties are honest? That is an excellent question. So by the way, first of all, we should realize
that the same thing is for every other system. When you look at proof of work, you rely that the
majority of the mining power is in honest ends. When you look at a delegated proof of stake,
you rely that the majority of these 21 people are honest. What is the difference? The difference
is that in these other systems, you should say the whole economy is secure. If the majority of this
small piece of the economy are honest. And that is a big question. But instead of what we in
Algorand and our approach, we say, the whole economy is secure if the majority of the economy
is honest. In other words, who can subvert Algorand is not a majority of a small group,
but is a majority of the token holders had to conspire with each other in order to think
the very economy for which they own the majority of. That I think it is a bit harder to
like a self destructive majority, essentially. And you're also making me realize that basically
every system that we have in the world today assumes that the majority of participants is honest.
Yes. The only difference is the majority of whom. And in some cases, the majority of a club.
And in our cases, the majority of the whole system, the whole system. Okay. So that's that's
fast. So through that kind of random sampling, you can achieve decentralization.
You can achieve. So the scalability, I understand. And then the security that you're referring to,
basically the security comes from the fact that the sample selected would likely include honest
people. So it's very difficult to. So by the way, the security, as you, as you mentioned,
that you're referring to is basically security against dishonesty, right? Or manipulation
or whatever. Yes. Yes. So essentially, when what you're going to do is to the following,
say, say, well, see if you understood what you're saying, but somebody has to randomly
select this tokens when I believe you. So then who does this random selection?
That's a good point. And in an algorithm, we do something a little bit unorthodox,
essentially is the token choose themselves at random. And you say, if you think about it,
that seems to be a terrible idea. Because if you want to say, choose yourself at random,
and whoever chooses himself is a thousand people committee, you choose the page for,
for the rest of us. And because if I'm a bad person, I'm going to select myself
over and over again, because I want to be part of the committee every single time.
But not so fast. So what do we do in algorithm? What does it mean that I select myself with each
one of us in the privacy of our own computer, actually a laptop? What you do is that you
execute your own individual lottery. And think about that, that you pull a lever
of a slot machine, you can only pull the lever once, not until you win, not enough times until
you win. And when you pull the lever case one, either you win in such a case, you have a winning
ticket, or you lose, you don't get any winning ticket. So if you don't have a winning ticket,
you can say anything you want about the next page in the ledger, nobody pays attention.
But if you have a winning ticket, people say, oh, wow, this is one of the 1000 winning tickets,
we better pay attention to what he or she says. And that's how it works. And the lottery is a
cryptographic lottery, which means that even if I am an entire nation, extremely powerful with
incredible computing powers, I don't have the ability to improve even minimally my probability
of one of my talking with the lottery. And that's how it happens. So everybody pulls the lever,
the 1000 random winners say, oh, here is my winning ticket. And here is my opinion up or down
about the block. These are the ones that count. And if you think about it, while this is distributed,
because there is the case of Algon, there is 10 billion tokens, and you selected a 1000 of them
more distributed than this, you cannot get. And then why is this, you know, scalable? Because
what do you have to do? Okay, you have to do the lottery. How long the lottery takes? It takes
actually one microsecond. Whether you have one token or two tokens or a billion tokens is always
one microsecond of computation, which is very fast. We don't hit the planet with a microsecond of
computation. And finally, why is this secure? Because even if I were a very evil and very,
very powerful individual, I'm so powerful that I can corrupt anybody I want instantaneously in the
world. Whom would I want to corrupt? The people in the committee, so that I can choose the page of
the ledger. But I do have a problem. I do not know whom I should corrupt. Should I corrupt this lady
in Shanghai, this other guy in Paris? Because I don't know, the winners are random, so I don't
know whom I should corrupt. But once the winner come forward and say, here is my winning ticket,
and you propagate your winning ticket across the network, together with your opinion about the block,
now I know who they are. For sure, I can corrupt all thousand of them given to my
incredible powers. But so what? Whatever they said, they already said, and their winning tickets and
their opinions are widely propagated across the network. And I do not have the power,
no more than the US government or any government has the power to put back in the bottle
a message widely propagated by WikiLeaks. So everything you just described is kind of,
is fascinating, a set of ideas. And, you know, online I've been reading quite a bit and people
are really excited about the set of ideas. Nevertheless, it is not the dominating technology
today. So Bitcoin, in terms of cryptocurrency, is the most popular cryptocurrency in the Ethereum,
and so on. So it's useful to kind of comment, we already talked about proof of work a little bit,
but what in your sense does Bitcoin get right, and where is it lacking?
Okay, so the first thing that Bitcoin got right is to understand that there was the need
of a cryptocurrency. And that, in my opinion, they deserve all the success because they say
that the time is ripe for this idea. Because very often it's not enough to be right here,
to be right at the right time, and somebody got it right there. So hard to offer to Bitcoin for that.
And so what they got to write is that it is hard to subvert and change the ledger,
to cancel a transaction. It's not impossible. That is very hard. What they did not get right is
somehow that is a great store of value, currency wise, but money is not only a question that you
store it, and you put under the mattress. Money wants to be transacted. And the transaction
in Bitcoins are very little. So if you want to store value, everybody needs to store value,
matter as well, use Bitcoin. I mean, it's the plant, but if you don't look at that for a moment,
at least it's a great store of value, and everybody needs a store of value. But most of the time,
we want to transact. We want to interact. We don't put the money under the mattress, right?
So we wanted to, and that, they didn't get it right. That is too slow to transact. Too few
transactions. There's a scalability issue. Is it possible to build stuff on top of Bitcoin
that sort of fixes the scalability? I mean, this is the thing. You look at, there's a bunch of
technologies that kind of hit the right need at the right time, and they have flaws, but we kind
of build infrastructures on top of them over time to fix it, as opposed to getting it right from
the beginning. Or is it difficult to do? Well, that is difficult to do. So you are talking to
somebody that when I decided to throw my heart in the arena, and I decided, first of all, as I
said before, I much admire my predecessors. I mean, they got it right, a lot of things, and I
really admire for that. But I had a choice to make. Either I patch something that holds all over
the place or start from scratch. I decided to start from scratch, because sometimes this is a
bit of a way. So what about Ethereum, which looks at proof of stake and a lot of different
innovative ideas that kind of improve or seek to improve on some of the flaws of Bitcoin?
Ethereum had another great idea. So they figured out that money and payments are important as they
are. They are only the first level, the first stepping stone. The next level are smart contracts,
and they were at the vision to say, the people will need smart contract, which allow me and you
to somehow to transact securely without being shopped around by a trusted third party, by a
mediator. By the way, because mediators are hard to find. And in fact, maybe even impossible to
find if you live in Thailand and I live in New Zealand, maybe we don't have a common person
that we know and trust. And even if we find them, guess what? They want to be paid. So much so right
that 6% of the world GDP goes into financial friction, which is essentially third party.
So headed right to the world needed that. But again, the scalability is not there. And the system
is, or smart contracts in Ethereum is slow and expensive. And I believe that is not enough to
satisfy the appetite and the need that we have for smart contracts.
Well, what do you make of just as a small sort of a side in human history, perhaps it's a big one,
is the NFT, the non fungible tokens, do you find those interesting technically,
or is it more interesting on the social side of things?
Well, both, I think, you know, I think it's NFTs are actually great, right? So you have this,
you are an artist to create a song or you could be a piece of art. He has many unique
representation right over a unique piece, where there is an artifact of something dreamed up
by you. And as unique representation, but now you can trade and allow. And the important part is that
now you have this, not only the NFTs themselves, but the ability to trade them quickly, fast,
securely, knowing that who owns which rights. And that gives a totally new opportunity for
content creators to be remunerator for what they do.
So but ultimately, you still have to have that scalability, security,
and decentralization to make it work for bigger and bigger applications.
Correct. Yeah.
Yeah. I still wonder what kind of applications are yet to be enabled by it, because so much,
the interesting thing about NFTs, if you look outside of art, is just like money,
you can start playing with different social constructs, is you can start playing with ideas.
You can start playing with, even like investing, somebody was talking about almost creating
an economy out of like creative people or influencers. Like if you start a YouTube channel
or something like that, you can invest in that person and you can start trading their creations.
And then almost like create a market out of people's ideas, out of people's creations,
out of the people themselves that generate those creations. And there's a lot of interesting
possibilities of what you can do with that. I mean, it seems ridiculous, but you're basically
creating a hierarchy of value, maybe artificial in the digital world and are trading that.
But in so doing are inspiring people to create. So maybe as a sort of our economy gets better
and better and better, where actual work in the physical space becomes less and less in terms
of its importance, maybe we'll completely be operating in a digital space where these kinds
of economies have more and more power. And then you have to have this kind of blockchains to
the scalability, security and decentralization. And decentralization is of course the tricky one
because people in power start to get nervous. Absolutely. Once in power, you're always nervous
to be supplanted by somebody else. But this is your job. So congratulations, your job,
the top job. And now everybody wants it. Well, what is your sense about our time and the future
hope about the decentralization of power? Do you think that's something that we can actually achieve
given that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts? Absolutely. And it's so wonderful
to be absolutely powerful. Well, good question. So first of all, I believe by the way,
it's a complex question, Alex. Like all the rest of your questions.
I'm so very sorry. It's okay. I am enjoying it. So there are two things. First of all,
power has been centralized for a variety of reasons. When you want to get it, it's easier for
somebody, even a single person to grab power. But there is also some kind of a technology
lack thereof that justified even in power. Because in a way, in a society in which even
communication never mind blockchain, which is common knowledge, but even simple unilateral
communication is hard, it's much easier to say, you do as I say, because the alternative is,
but as so there is a little bit of a technology barrier. But I think that and now to get to this
common knowledge that is a totally different story. Now we have finally the technology for
doing this. So that is one part. But I really believe that, you know, by having a distributed
system, not only you don't have a way, you have to actually much more stable and durable system.
Because not only for corruption, but even for things that go astray and you give it a long
enough time by strange version of Murphy's law, whatever goes wrong, goes wrong. And so
and if the power is diffused, you actually are much more stable. If you look at any
any living, complex living being is distributed. I mean, I'm, I don't have somebody is a, okay,
tell Sylvia now it's time to eat. You have millions of cells in your body. You have
billions of bacteria. Exactly. Help me in the guts of a thing. You know, we are in a soup.
It keeps us alive. And so it's strange enough, however, when we design systems,
we design them centralized. We ourselves are distributed beings. And when we plan to say,
okay, I want to get an architecture, how about I make a pyramid, I put the top and the power
flows down. And so again, it's a little bit perhaps of a technology problem. But now the
technology is there. So that is a big challenge to rethink how we want to organize power in very
large system and, and, and distributed system in my opinion, are much more resilient.
Let's put it this way. There was a wine, or my Italian compatriots, right? You know,
Machiavelli, who, who looked at the time, there was a big, there was a bunch of small state
democratic Republic of Florence of Venice and the other thing. And there was the Ottoman Empire,
but at the time was an empire and a certain was very centralized. And I made a political observation
that goes roughly to say, whenever you have such a centralized thing is very hard to
overtake that, that form of government is centralized. But if you get it, it's so easy to
keep the population. One instead, these other, these other things are much more resilient.
And when the power is distributed, it's much more, it's going to be lasting for much longer
time. And ultimately, maybe the human spirit wants that kind of resilience, wants that kind
of distributed. It's just that we didn't have technology throughout history. Machiavelli didn't
have the computer, the internet, and that is certainly part of a reason. Yes. You've written
an interesting blog post. If we take a step out of the realm of bits and into this,
the realm of governance, you wrote a blog post about making Algorand governance decentralized.
Can you explain what that means, the philosophy behind that? How do you
decentralize basically all aspects of this kind of system? Well, the philosophy and the
how let's start with the philosophy. So I really believe that nothing fixed last very long. And
so I really believe that life is about intelligent adaptation. Things change, and we have to be
nimble and adjust to change. And when I, when I see a lot of a crypto project, actually very
proud to say it's fixed in stone, right, you know, code is low, law is called, I very
of a code will never change. Wow. When I'm saying this is a recipe to me of disaster,
not immediately, but soon. Just imagine you take an ocean liner and you want to go, I don't know,
from Lisbon to New York, and you set a course, iceberg, no iceberg, tempest, no tempest,
and all. It doesn't matter. But it's not the way. You need a till, you need to correct,
you need to adjust. And so, by the way, we design an algorithm with the idea that the code was
evolving as the needs. And of course, a waiver is a system in which every time there is an
adjustment, you must have essentially a vote that right now is orchestrated at 90% of the
stake. They say, okay, we are ready, we agree on the next version, and we pick up this version.
So we are able to evolve without losing too many components left and right. But I think
without evolving, any system essentially become asphatic, and that is going to shrivel and die
sooner or later. And so that is needed. And what do you want to do on the blockchain? You have a
perfect platform in which you can log your wishes, your votes, your things so that you have a
guarantee that whatever vote you express is actually seen by everybody else. So everybody
sees really the outcome, call it a referendum or a change. And that is, in my opinion, a system
that wants to live long as to adapt. There's an interesting question about leaders. I've talked
to Vitalik Buterin. I'll probably talk to him again soon. He's one of the leaders, maybe one of
the faces of the Ethereum project. And it's interesting, you have Satoshi Nakamoto, who's
the face of Bitcoin, I guess, but he's faceless. He, she, they. It does seem like in our whatever
it is, maybe it's 20th century, maybe it's Machiavellian thinking, but we seek leaders. Leaders
have value. Linus Torvald, the leader of Linux, the open source development a lot. I mean, there's
no, it's not, it's not that the leadership is sort of dogmatic, but it's inspiring. And it's also
powerful in that through leaders, we propagate the vision, like the vision of the project is
more stable, maybe not the details, but the vision. And so do you think there's value to, because
there's a tension between decentralization and leadership, like in vision areas? What do you
make of that tension? Okay, so I really believe that that's a great question. I think of it, you
know, I really believe in the power of emotions. I think the emotions are of a creative impulse
of everybody else. And therefore it's very easy for a leader to be a physical person, a real being,
and that interprets our emotions. And by the way, this emotion has to resonate. And what is good
is that the more intimate our emotions are, the more universal they are, paradoxically. The more
personal, the more everybody else somehow magically agrees and feels a bit of the same.
And so, and it's very important to have a leader in the initial phase that
generates out on nothing something. That is important leadership. But then the true tested
leadership is to disappear after you led the community. So in my opinion, the quintessential
leader in my, according to my vision is George Washington. He served for one term,
he served for another term, and then all of a sudden he retired and became a private citizen.
And 200 and change years later, we still are with some defects, but we have done a lot of
things right. And we have been able to vote. That to me is success in leadership. Well,
instead, you contrast our experiment with a lot of experiments. I've done so much, so well,
that I want another four years. And why shouldn't I be only a four? And I have another eight. Why
should it be another eight? Give me 16 and we'll fix all your problem. And now then is the type,
in my opinion, of failed leadership. Leadership ought to be really lead, ignite, and disappear.
And if you don't disappear, the system is going to die with you. And it's not a good idea for
everybody else. Is there, so we've been talking a little bit about cryptocurrency, but is there
spaces where this kind of blockchain ideas that you're describing, which I find fascinating,
do you think they can revolutionize some other aspects of our world that's not just money?
A lot of things are going to be revolutionized is independent of finance. By the way,
I really believe that finance is an incredible form of freedom. I mean,
if I free to do everything I want, but I don't even mean to do anything, that's a bad idea.
So I really think financial freedom is very, very important. But you just can say that
against censorship, you write something on the chain and now nobody can take it out. That is a
very important way to express our view. And then the transparency that you give, because
everybody can see what's happening on the blockchain. So transparency is not money,
but I believe that transparency actually is a very important ingredient also of finance.
Let's put it this way. As much as I'm enthusiastic about blockchain and decentralized finance,
and we have actually our expression, we're creating this future five, because as much as we
want to do, we must agree that the first guarantee of financial growth and prosperity
are really the legal system, the courts. Because we may not think about them and say,
oh, the courts are a bunch of boring lawyers. But without them, I'm saying there is no certainty.
There is no notion of equality. There is no notion that you can resolve your disputes thing.
That's what drives the commerce and things. And so what I really believe that the blockchain
actually makes a lot of this trust essentially automatic by making it impossible to cheat in
the real way. You don't even need to go to court if nobody can change the ledger.
So essentially it's a way of you cannot solve an illegal system that uses to a blockchain.
But what I'm saying, a big chunk of it can actually be guaranteed. And there is no reason
why technology should be antagonistic to legal scholarship. It could be actually
equestrian. And one should start to doing the interest things that the technology alone cannot
do. And then you go from there. But I think that is essentially is blockchain can affect
all kinds of our behavior. Yes, in some sense, the transparency, the required transparency ensures
honesty prevents corruption. So there's a lot of systems that could use that and the legal system
is one of them. There's a little bit of attention that I wonder if you can speak to where this
kind of transparency, there's attention with privacy. Is it possible to achieve privacy if
you wanted on a blockchain? Do you have ideas about different technologies that can do that?
People have been playing with different ideas. So absolutely. The answer is yes. And by the way,
I'm a cryptographer. Right. So I really believe in privacy and I believe in and I've devoted in
all a big chunk of my life to guarantee privacy even when it seems almost impossible to have it.
And it is possible to have it in also in the blockchain too. And however, I believe in timing
as well. And I believe that the people have the right to understand
their system they live in. And right now, people can understand the blockchain to be
something that is not, cannot be altered and is transparent. And that is good enough.
And right now, any way to add and there is a pseudo privacy for the fact that
who knows if the keys belong, public key belongs to me or to you, right? And I can,
when I want to change my money from one public key, I split it to other public keys going to
figure out which one is silver or all of them are silver or only one of silver. Who knows?
So you get some vanilla privacy, not the one acrector. And I think it's good enough because
and it's important for now that we absorb this stage because the next stage, we must understand
the privacy tool rather than taking on faith. When the public starts say, I believe in the
scientists and whatever they say, I swear by them and therefore they tell me private is private
and nobody understands that we need a much more educated about the tools we are using.
And so I look forward to deploying more and more privacy on the blockchain.
But we are not, I will not rush to it until the people understand and are behind whatever we have
right now. So you build privacy on top of the power of the blockchain. You have to first
understand the power of the blockchain. Yes. Yes. So Algorand is like one of the most exciting,
technically at least from my perspective, technologies, ideas in this whole space.
What's the future of Algorand look like? Is it possible for it to dominate the world?
Let's put it this way. I certainly working very hard with a great team to give the best blockchain
that one can demand and enjoy. And they said, I really believe that there is going to be,
it's not a winner takes them all. So it's going to be a few blockchains and each one is going to
have its own brand and it's going to be great at something. And sometimes it's a scalability,
sometimes it's your views, sometimes it's a thing. And it's important to have a dialogue between
these things. And I'm sure and I'm working very hard to make sure that Algorand is one of them.
But I don't believe of it. It's even desirable to have a winner takes all because we need to
express different things. But the important thing is going to have enough interoperability
of various systems so that you can transfer your assets where you have the best tool to
service them, whatever your needs are at the time. So there's an idea, I don't know,
they call themselves Bitcoin maximalists, which is essentially the bet that the philosophy that
Bitcoin will eat the world. So you're talking about, it's good to have variety. Their claim is
it's good to have the best technology dominate the medium of exchange, the medium of store value,
the money, the digital currency space. What's your sense of the positives and the negatives of that?
So I feel people are smart and it's going to be very hard for anybody and
to win. And because people want more and more things, there is an Italian saying that goes
as translates well, I think. It goes, appetite grows while eating. I think you understand
what he means. So I say, I'm not hungry. Okay, food. Let me try this and that. So we want more
and more and more. And when you find something like Bitcoin, which I already had very good things to
say, but it does something very well, but it's static. I mean, store value, yes, I think it's a
great way. For the rest, it would be a sad world if the world in which we are so anchoring down,
so and defensive that we want to store value and hide it on the mattress. I long for a world in which
it is open. We all want to transact and interact with each way. And therefore, when you want to
store value, one, perhaps one chain, where you want to have to transact, maybe is another. I'm
not saying that, you know, one chain cannot be stored value or the other thing, but I really
believe that I believe in the ingenuity of people and in the innovation that is intrinsic to the
human nature. We want always different things. So how can it be something invented? Whatever it is
decades ago is going to fulfill the needs of our future generations. I'm not going to fulfill my
needs, let alone my kids or their kids. We are going to have a different world and things will
evolve. So you believe that life, intelligent life is ultimately about adaptability and
evolving. So static is, static loses in the end. Yes. Let me ask the, well first, the ridiculous
question. Do you have any clue who Satoshi Nakamoto is? Is that even an interesting question?
Well, is it you? Your questions are very interesting. So I would say, first of all,
it's not me and I can prove it because, you know, if I were Satoshi Nakamoto, I would have not found
an algorithm that takes totally different principles to approach to the system. But the
other thing, who is Satoshi Nakamoto? You know what the right answer is? It's not him or she,
her or them. Satoshi Nakamoto is Bitcoin because to me, it's such a coherent proof of work that
at the end, the creator and the creation identify themselves. So he says, okay, I understand the
Michelangelo. Okay, he did the Sistine Chapel fine. He did the St. Peter's Dome fine. He did
the Moses of the Pietra statue fine. But besides this, who was Michelangelo? That's a very long
question. This is his own work that is Michelangelo. So I think that when you look at the Bitcoin,
is a piece of work that, as it defects, yes, like anything human, but it was captivated
the imaginations of millions of people as subverted the status quo. And I'm saying, you know,
whoever this person of people are, he's living in this piece of work. I mean, it is Bitcoin.
The idea of the work is bigger. We forget that sometimes. It's something about our biology
once likes to see a face and attach a face to the idea, when really the idea is the thing we love,
the idea is the thing that impact ideas, the thing that ultimately we, you know, Steve Jobs or
something like that, we associate with the Mac, with the iPhone, with just everything he did at
Apple. Apple actually, the company is Steve Jobs. Steve Jobs, the man is a pales in comparison to
the creations of the man. Correct. And the sense of aesthetics that has brought to the daily lives.
And very often aesthetic wins in the long, in the long, in the long end. And these are very
elegant design product. And when you say, oh, elegance, a very few people care about it, apparently
millions and millions and millions and millions of people do because we are attacked by beauty.
And these are beautifully designed products. And, and, and, you know, and they've, in addition
to ever the technological aspect of the other thing. And I think, yes, that is,
yeah, as the Steyesky said, beauty will save the world. So I'm, I'm with you on that one.
Right. It currently seems like cryptocurrency, all these different technologies are gathering
a lot of excitement, not just in our discourse, but in their like, scale financial impact.
A lot of companies are starting to invest in Bitcoin. Do you think that the main method of
store value and exchange of value, basically money will soon, or at some point in the century,
will become cryptocurrency? Yes. So mind you, as I said, that the notion of cryptocurrency,
like any other fundamental human notion has to evolve. But yes. So I think that he has a lot
of momentum behind it. And it's not only static, as this programmable money, as I think smart
contracts, all the time. It allows a peer to peer interaction among people who don't even
know each other, right? And they don't even, therefore cannot even trust each other just
because they never saw each other. So I think it's so powerful that it's going to do this.
Again, a particular cryptocurrency should develop and cryptocurrency will all develop.
But the answer is yes, we are going towards a much more, unless we have a society,
a sudden crisis for different reasons, which nobody hopes. There's always an asteroid,
there's always a nuclear war and all the existential crisis that we think about,
including artificial intelligence. Okay. It's funny you mentioned that
Michelangelo and Steve Jobs, a set of ideas represents the person's work. So we talked
about Algorand, which is a super interesting set of technologies. But he did also win the
Turing Award. You have a bunch of ideas that are seminal ideas. So can we talk about
cryptography for a little bit? What is the most beautiful idea in cryptography or computer science
or mathematics in general? Asking somebody who has explored the depths of all?
Well, a few contenders.
Either your work or other work. Let's leave my work aside.
But one powerful idea and it's both an old idea in some sense and a very, very modern one.
And it might be on this idea of a one way function. So a function that easy to evaluate.
So given X, you can compute f of X easily. But given f of X is very hard to go back to X.
Okay. Think alike, breaking a glass easy, reconstruct the glass harder, frying an egg
easy from the side egg to go back to the original egg harder. If you want to be extreme,
killings are living big. Unfortunately, easy. The other way around, very hard. And so the fact
that the notion of a function, which you have a recipe that is in front of your eyes to transform
an X into f of X, and then from f of X, even though you see the recipe to transform it,
you cannot go back to X that, in my opinion, is one of the most elegant and momentous
notions that there are. And there is a computational notion because of the difficulties
in a computational sense. And it's a mathematical notion because we were talking about function.
And it's so fruitful because that is actually the foundation of all the cryptography.
And let me tell you, it's an old notion because very often in any mythology that we think of,
the most powerful gods or goddesses are the ones of X and the opposite of X, the gods of love and
death. And when you take opposite, they don't just erase one another, you create something way
more powerful. And this one way function is extremely powerful because essentially becomes
something that is easy for the good guys and hard for the bad guys. So for instance,
in pseudo random number generation, the easy part of the function corresponds, you want to
generate bits very quickly. And hard is predicting what the next bit is. It doesn't look the same.
One is Excel for X going from X for X to XR, what does do predicting bits by a magic of
reductions and mathematical apparatus. This simple function morphs itself into sort of
random generation. This simple function morphs itself in digital signature scheme,
in which digitally signing should be easy and forging should be hard. Again, a digital signature
is not going from X to F for X, but the magic and the richness of this notion is that it is so
powerful with morphs in all kinds of incredible constructs. And in both, these two opposites
coexist, the easy and the hard. And in my opinion, it is a very, very elegant notion. So that
simple notion ties together cryptography. And like you said, pseudo random number generation,
you have work on pseudo random functions. What are those? What's the difference in those and the
generators, pseudo random number generators? How do they work? Let's go back to pseudo random number
generation. First of all, people think that the pseudo random number generation generates random
number. Not true, because I don't believe that from nothing you can get, you can get something.
So nothing from nothing. But randomness, you cannot create that on nothing. But what you can do
is that you can be expanded. So in other words, if you give me somehow 300 random bits, truly
random bits, then I can give you 300,000, 300,000, 300 trillions, 300 quadrillions, as many as you
want random bits. So that even though I tell you the recipe by which I produce these bits,
but I don't tell you the initial 300 random numbers, I keep them secret. And you see all the bits I
produced so far. If you were to bet, given all the bits produced so far, what is the next bit in
my sequence? Better than 50, 50. Of course, 50, 50, anybody can guess, right? But to be inferring
something, you have to be a bit better. Then the effort to do this extra bit is so enormous that
is the factor random. So that is a pseudo random generator, are these expanders of secret randomness,
which goes extremely fast. Okay, that said, what is the... Expanders of secret randomness,
beautifully put. Okay. So every time, every time somebody, if you're a programmer is using a function
that's not called pseudo random, it's called random usually, you know, these programming
languages and it's generating different, that's essentially expanding the secret randomness.
But they should. In the past, actually, in most of the library, they used something
pre modern cryptography. Unfortunately, they would be better served to make 300 real seed
random number and then expand them properly, as we know now. But that has been a very
old idea. In fact, one of the best philosophers have debated whether the world was deterministic
or probabilistic. Very big questions, right? Does God play dice? Exactly. Einstein says it does,
it doesn't. But in fact, now we have a language that even at the Albert time was not around,
but it was this complexity theory, modern complexity based cryptography. And now we know
that in the universe, as 300 random bits, whether where is random or probabilistic or deterministic,
it doesn't matter, because you can expand this initial seed of randomness forever in which
all the experiments you can do, all the influences you can do, all the things you can do, they are,
you are not able to distinguish them from truly random. So if you are not able to distinguish
truly random from this super duper pseudo randomness, are they really different things?
So for things to be different, but I don't have in my lifetime, in my lifetime of the universe,
animated, to set them aside, well, I should be intellectually honest to say, well,
pseudo random in the special function is as good as random.
Do you think true randomness is possible? And what does that mean?
So, practically speaking, exactly as you said, if you're being honest,
the pseudo randomness approaches true randomness pretty quickly. But is it, maybe this is a
philosophical question, is there such a thing as true randomness?
Well, the answer is actually maybe, but if it exists, most probably is expensive to get.
And in any case, if I give you one online random, you will never tell them apart.
By no any other shape, no matter how much you work on it. So in some sense,
if it exists or not, it really is a quote philosophical sense in the colloquial way to
say that we cannot somehow pin it down. Do you ever, again, just to stay on philosophical
for a bit for a brief moment? Do you ever think about free will? And whether that exists? Because
ultimately, free will sort of is this experience that we have, like we're making choices.
Even though it appears that, you know, the world is deterministic at the core, I mean,
that's against the debate. But if it is, in fact, deterministic at the lowest possible level,
at the physics level, how do you make, if it is deterministic, how do you make
sense of the difference between the experience of us feeling like we're making a choice and
the whole thing being deterministic. So first of all, let me give you a gut reaction to the
question. And the gut reaction is that it is important that we believe that there exists free
will. And second of all, almost by weird logic, if we believe it exists, then it does exist.
So it's very important for our social apparatus, for our sense of the day or ourselves,
that it exists. And the moment in which, you know, we so want to be almost we conjure it up in
existence. But again, I really feel that if you look at some point, the space of free will
so seems to shrink. We realize how more and more, how much of our, say, genetic apparatus
dictates who we are, why we prefer certain things than others, right? And why we react to noises
of music. We prefer poetry. We may explain even all this. But at the end of the day,
whether it exists in a philosophical sense or not, it's like randomness. If you can, if pseudo
random is as good as random, vis a vis lifetime of the universe, our experience, then it doesn't
really matter. So, you know, we're talking about randomness. I wonder if I can weave in
quantum mechanics for a brief moment. There's, you know, a lot of advancements on the quantum
computing side. So leveraging quantum mechanics to perform a new kind of computation. And there's
concern of that being a threat to a lot of the basic assumptions that underlie cryptography.
What do you think? Do you think quantum computing will challenge a lot of cryptography?
Will cryptography be able to defend all those kinds of things?
Okay, great. So first of all, for the record, because I think it matters, but it's important
that the record, there are people who continue to contend that quantum mechanics exist, but
there's nothing to do with computing. It's not going to accelerate it. At least, you know,
very basic, you know, hard computation. That is a belief that you cannot take it out. I'm a little
bit more agnostic about it, but I really believe going back to whatever I said about the one way
function. So one way function, what is it? That's the cryptography. So does quantum computing
challenge the one way function? Essentially, you can boil it down to does one computing
find a one way function? What is one way function? Easy in one direction, hard in the other.
Okay, but if quantum computing exists, when you define what it is easy, it's not by easy,
by a classical computer, and hard by a classical computer, but easy for a quantum computer. That's
a bad idea. But once easy means it should be easy for a quantum and hard for also quantum.
Then you can see that you are, yes, it's a challenge, but you have a hope because you
can absorb if one computing really realizes and becomes available, according to the promises,
then you can use them also for the easy part. And once you use it for the easy part, the choices
that you have a one way function, they multiply. So, okay, so they particularly candidates of one
way function, they not be one way anymore, but quantum one way function may continue to exist.
And so I really believe that for life to be meaningful is the one way function had to exist.
Because just imagine that anything that is it becomes easy to do. I mean, what kind of life
is it? I mean, so you need that. And if something is hard, but it's so hard to generate, you'll never
find something which is hard for you. You want that there is abundance that is easy to produce
hard problem. That's my opinion is why life is interesting because hard problem pop up
really relatively speed. So in some sense, I almost think that I do hope they exist if they
don't exist somehow life is way less interesting than it actually is.
Yeah, it does. That's funny. It does seem like the one way function is fundamental to all of life,
which is the emergence of the complexity that we see around us seem to require the one way
function. I don't know if you play with cellular automata. That's just another formulation of
I know, but yes, very simple. It's almost a very simple illustration of starting out with
simple rules and one way being able to generate incredible amounts of complexity. But then you
ask the question, can I reverse that? And it's just, it's just surprising how difficult it is to
reverse that. It's surprising even in constrained situations, it's very difficult to prove anything
that it almost I mean, the sad thing about it. Well, I don't know if it's sad, but it seems
like we don't even have the mathematical tools to reverse engineer stuff. I don't know if they
exist or not. But in the space of cellular automata, when you start with something simple
and you create something incredibly complex, can you take something, a small picture of that
complex and reverse engineer? That's kind of what we're doing as scientists here.
You're seeing the result of the complexity and you're trying to come up with some universal law
that generate all of this. What is the, you know, the theory of everything? What are the basic
physics laws that generate this whole thing? And there's a hope that you should be able to do that,
but it gets, it's difficult. Yeah, but there is also some poetry on the fact that it's difficult
because it gives us a mystery to live without which I mean, it's not so fun. Life will be less
fun. Can we talk about interactive proofs a little bit and zero knowledge proofs? What are those?
Okay. How do they work? So interactive proof actually is a modern realization and conceptualization
of something that we knew was true, that, you know, that is easy to go to lecture. In fact,
that's my motivation. We invented schools to go to lecture and we don't say, oh, I have the
Minister of Education, I published this book, you read it. And this is a book for this year,
this book for this year. We spend a lot of our treasury in educating our kids and in person,
educating, go to class, interact with each other on the blackboard and chalk on my time. Now we can
have, you know, whiteboard and presumably you're going to have actually these magic pens and a
display instead. But the idea is that interactively you can convey truth much more efficiently.
And we knew this psychologically. It's better to hear an explanation than just to belabor some paper,
right? Same thing. So interactive proofs is a way to do the following. Rather than doing
in some complicated, very long papers and possibly infinitely long proofs, exponentially long proofs,
you say the following. If this theorem is true, there is a game that is associated to the theorem.
And if the theorem is true, this game, I have a winning strategy that I can win half of the
time, no matter what you do. Okay. So then you say, well, is the theorem true? You believe me?
Why should I believe you? So, okay, let's play. So, and if I prove that I have a strategy that,
and I win the first time, and I win the second time, then I lose the third time, but I win
more than half of the time, or I win, say, all the time if the theorem is true and at least
at the most half of the time, if the theorem is false, you statistically get convinced you can
verify this quickly. And therefore, when the game typically is extremely fast,
so you generate a miniature game in which if the theorem is true, I win all the time,
in the theorem is false, I can win at most half of the time, and if I win, win, win, win, win,
win, win, win, you can deduce either the theorem is true, which most probably is the case on this week,
or I've been very, very unlucky because it's like if I had 100 coin tosses and I got 100 heads,
very improbable. So that is a way, and so this transformation from the formal statement of a
proof into a game that can be quickly played, and you can draw statistics on many times you win,
and is one of a big conquest of modern complexity theory, and in fact, actually as highlighted,
the notion of a proof has really given us a new insight of what to be true means, and what
what truth is, and what proofs are. So these are legitimately proofs. So what kind of mysteries
can it allow us to unlock and prove? You said truth. So what does it allow us, what kind of truth
does it allow us to arrive at? So it enlarges the realm of what is provable, because in some sense
of the classical way of proving things was extremely inefficient from the very fire point of view.
Yes. Right. So and so therefore, there is so much proof that you can take, but in this way,
you can actually very quickly, minutes, verify something that is the correctness of an assertion,
that otherwise would have taken a lifetime to belabor and check all the passages of a very,
very long proof, and you better check all of them, because if you don't check one line,
an error can be in that line. And so you have to go linearly through all the stuff rather than
bypass this. So you enlarge tremendous amount, what the proof is. And in addition,
once you have the idea that essentially a proof system is something that
allows me to convince you of a true statement, but does not allow me to convince you of a
false statement. And that at the end says events of proof, proof can be beautiful, should be,
should be elegant, but at the end says is true or false. If you want to be able to differentiate,
it is possible to prove the truth and it should be impossible or statistically extremely hard
to prove something false. And if you do this, you can prove way, way more once you understand this.
And on top of it, we got some insight, like in this zero knowledge proofs, that is in
something which you took for granted, where the same knowledge and verification
are actually separate concepts. So you can verify that an assertion is correct
without having any idea of why this is so. And so people felt to say, if you want to verify
something yet to have the proof, once you have the proof, you know why is true, you have the proof
itself. So somehow you can totally differentiate knowledge and verification validity. So totally,
you can decide if something is true and still have no idea. Is a good example in your mind?
Oh, actually, you know, at the beginning, we labored to find the first knowledge,
zero knowledge proof, then we found the second, then we found the third. And then a few years later,
actually, we proved a theorem which essentially says every theorem, no matter what about,
can be explained in a zero knowledge way. Okay. So it's not a class of theorem, but old theorems.
And it's a very powerful thing. So we were really, for thousands of years,
bought this identity between knowledge and verification, to be hand in hand together,
and for no reason at all. I mean, we had to develop a way of technology, as you know,
and very big technology, because it makes us more human and make us understand more things
than before. And I think that is a good thing. So this interactive proof process,
there's power in games. And you've recently gotten into, recently, I'm not sure you can
correct me, mechanism design. Yeah. So it's, I mean, first of all, maybe you can explain
what mechanism design is and the fascinating space of playing with games and designing games.
Mechanism design is that you want to, you want a certain behavior to arise, right? If you want
to organize, you know, a societal structure or something, you want to have some orderly
behavior to arise, right? Because it is important for your goals. But you know that people,
they don't care what my goals are, they cares about maximizing their utility. So put it crossly,
making money, the more money, the better, so to speak. But I'm exaggerating.
Self interest in what?
Self interest. Whatever way then. So what you want to do is ideally, what you want to do is to
design a game so that while people played, so to maximize their self interest,
they achieve the social goal and behavior that I want. That is really the best type of thing.
And it is a very hard science and art to design these games. And it challenges us to
actually come up with a solution concept for way to analyzing the games that need to be broader.
And I think the game theory has developed a bunch of very compelling
ways to analyze the game that if the game has a best property, you can have a pretty good guarantee
that is going to be played in a given way. But as it turns out, and not surprisingly,
these tools have a range of action like anything else. All these so called the
technically solution concept, the way to analyze the game like
dominant strategy, something comes to mind to be very meaningful.
But as a limited power, in some sense, the games that can be
admit such a way to be analyzed.
There's a very specific kind of games and the rules are set, the constraints are set,
the utilities are all set. So if you want to reason, if there is a way say
that you can analyze a restricted class of games this way. But most games don't fall
into this restricted class. Then what do I do? Then you need to enlarge away what a rational
player can do. So for instance, in my opinion, at least in some of my, I played with this for
a few years and I was doing some exoteric things, I'm sure in the space that were not exactly
mainstream. And then I changed my interest and blockchain. But when I'm saying for a while,
I was doing that. So for instance, to me, is a way in which I design the game and you don't
have the best move for you. The best move is the move that is best for you, no matter what the
other players are doing. Sometimes a game doesn't have that. Okay, it's too much to ask. But I can
design the game, such of it, given the option in front of you say, oh, these are really stupid
for me, take them aside. But these, these are not stupid. So if you design them, the game,
so that in any combination of non stupid things that the player can do, I achieve what I want,
I'm done. I don't care to find the very unique equilibrium. I don't give a damn. I want to say,
well, as long as you don't do stupid things and nobody else does stupid things, good social
things, outcome arise, I should be equally happy. And so I really believe that this type of analysis
is possible. And as a bigger radius, so it reaches more games, more classes of games.
And after that, we have to enlarge it again. And it's going to be, we are going to have fun,
because human behavior can be conceptualized in many ways. And it's a long game.
It's a long game. Do you have favorite games that you're looking at now? I mean, I suppose
your work with Blockchain and Algorand is a kind of game that you're, you're basically this
mechanism design, design the game such that it's scalable, secure and decentralized, right?
Yes. Yes. And very often yet to say, and very, and you must also design so that the incentives
are, are, are, and then, then you have a tool for whatever little I learned from my venture
in mechanism design is that incentives are very hard to design, because people are very complex
creatures. And so, and so somehow the way we design Algorand is a totally different way,
essentially with no incentives, essentially. And, and, but, but technically speaking,
there is a notion that is actually believable, right? So that to say,
people want to maximize their utility, yes, up to a point. Let me, let me tell you, assume that
if you are honest, you make a hundred bucks. But if you are dishonest, no matter how dishonest
you are, you can only make a hundred bucks and one cent. What are you going to be? I'm saying,
you know, what technically speaking, even that one cent, nobody bothers and say,
how much am I going to make by honest hundred? If I'm devious, and if I'm a criminal,
one hundred bucks and one cent, you know, I might as well be honest. Okay. So that essentially is
called, you know, epsilon utility, equilibrium, but I think it's good. And, and, and, and that's
what we designed. Essentially means that, you know, there is an, uh, having no incentives is
actually a good thing because to prevent people from reasoning how else I'm going to gain the system.
But why can we achieve an algorithm to have no incentives and in Bitcoin instead yet to pay
the miners because they do tremendous amount of work? Because if you have to do a lot of work,
then you demand to be paid accordingly. Because you, right? But if I're going to say,
you had to add the two and two equal to four, how much you want to be paid for this? Or if you
don't give me this, I don't add the two and two. I would say you can add two and two in your sleep.
You don't need to be paid to add the two and two. So the idea is that if we make the system so
efficient, so that generating the next block is so damn simple, it doesn't hit the universe,
let alone my computer, let alone take some micro signal computation, I might as well
not being received incentives for doing that and try to incentivize some other part of the system,
but not the main consensus, which is a mechanism for generating and adding block to the chain.
Since you're Italian, Sicilian, I also heard rumors that you are a connoisseur of food.
You know, if I said today is the last day you get to be alive, I'm Russian. You shouldn't
have trusted me. You never know whether you're going to make it out or not. If you had one last
meal, you can travel somewhere in the world. Either you make it or somebody else makes it.
What's that going to look like? All right. If it's one last meal, I must say,
you know, in this era of COVID, I've not been able to see my mom and my mom was a fantastic chef,
okay? And they had this very traditional food. As you know, the very traditional food are great
for a reason because they survived hundreds of years of culinary innovation. So there is one
very laborious thing, which is, and you heard of a name, which is Parmigiana,
but to do it is a piece of art. There were so many hours, but only my mom could do it.
If I had one last meal, I want Parmigiana, okay? What is the laborious process? Is it the ingredients?
Is it the actual process? Is it the atmosphere and the humans involved?
And the latter. The ingredients, like in any other Italian cuisine,
believes in very few ingredients. If you take, say, quintessential Italian recipe,
spaghetti pesto, okay? Pesto is olive oil, very good extra virgin olive oil,
basil, pine nuts, pepper, a clove of garlic, not too much. Otherwise, you overpower everything.
And then you have to do either two schools of thought, Parmesan or pecorino or a mix of the two.
I mentioned six ingredients. That is typical Italian. I understand that there are other
cuisines, for instance, a French cuisine, which is extremely sophisticated and extremely combinatorial,
or some Chinese cuisine, which has a lot of, many more ingredients than this. And yet the
artists, to put them together, a lot of things. In Italy, it's really the striving for simplicity.
Yet to find few ingredients, but the right ingredients to create something. So in Parmigiana,
the ingredients are eggplants, they are tomatoes, they are basil. But how to put them together
and the process is an act of love, okay? Labor and love. It's that you can spend the entire day
when I'm exaggerating, but the entire morning for sure, to do it properly.
Yeah, as a Japanese cuisine too, there's a mastery to the simplicity with the sushi.
I don't know if you've seen Georgians of sushi, but there's a mastery to that that's propagated
through the generations. It's fascinating. You know, people love it when I ask about books.
I don't know if books, whether fiction, nonfiction, technical or completely nontechnical,
had an impact in your life throughout, if there's anything you would recommend,
or even just mention as something they gave you an insight or moved you in some way.
So, okay. So I don't know if I recommend because in some sense, you almost had to be Italian or
to be such a scholar, but being Italian, one thing that really impressed me tremendously
is the divine comedy. It is a medieval poem, a very long poem divided in three parts,
hell, purgatory and paradise. And that is the non trivial story of a middleman man
gets into a crisis, personal crisis. And then out of this crisis, he purifies,
when he's a catastrophe, purifies himself more and more and more until he's become capable
of actually meeting God. Okay. And this is actually a complex story. So you had to get some very
sophisticated language, maybe Latin at that point that we were talking about 1200s in Italy,
in Florence. This guy instead, he chose his own dialect, not spoken outside his own immediate
circle, right? A Florentine dialect. Actually, Dante really made Italian. How can you express
such a sophisticated things and so forth? And then the point is that these words that nobody
actually knew because they were essentially dialect, and plus a bunch of very intricate rhymes
in which you had to rhyme with the things and turns out that by getting meaning from the things that
you rhyme, you essentially guess what the word means. And you invent Italian and you communicate
by almost osmosis what you want is a miracle of communication in a dialect, a very poor language,
very unsophisticated to express very sophisticated situation. I love it. People who love it and
Italians and not Italian. But what I got of it is that very often limitations are our strength.
Because if you limit yourself at a very poor language, somehow you get out of it and you
achieve even better form of communication if you're using a hyper sophisticated and literary
language with lots of resonance from the prior books so that you can actually instantaneously
quote, he couldn't quote anything because nothing was written in Italian before him. So I really felt
that limitations are our strength. And I think that rather than complaining about the limitations,
we should embrace them because if we embrace our limitation, limited as we are, we find
very creative solutions that people with less limitation we have, we would not even think
about it. Well, the limitation is a superpower if you choose to see it that way. Since you speak
both languages, is there something that's lost in translation to you? Is there something you
can express in Italian that you can't in English and vice versa maybe? Is there something you
could say to the musicality of the language? I've been to Italy a few times and I'm not sure if it's
the actual words, but the people are certainly very, there's body language too. There's just the
whole being is language. So I don't know if you miss some of that when you're speaking English in
this country. Yes. In fact, actually, certainly I miss it and somehow it was a sacrifice that I
made consciously by the time I arrived, I knew that this I was not going to express myself
at a better level. And it was actually a sacrifice because given you have also your
mother tongue is Russian, so you know that you can be very expressive in your mother tongue
and not very expressive as a new language. And then what people think of you in the new language
because when the precise of expression of things, it generates, it shows elegance or it shows
knowledge or it shows as a sense or it shows as a caste or education, whatever it is. So all of a
sudden I found myself on the bottom. So I had to fight all my way up back up. But what I'm saying,
I go back to the limitations are actually our strength. In fact, it's a trick to limit yourself
to exceed. And there are examples in history. If you think about or Hernn Corts goes to
invade Mexico, he has what? A few hundred people with him and he has a hundred thousand people
in arms on the other side. First thing he does, he limits himself. He sinks his own ship. There is
no return. Okay. And I'm very proud of the actual manager. That's really profound. I actually,
first of all, that's inspiring to me. I feel like I have quite a few limitations, but more
practically on the Russian side, I'm going to try to do a couple of really big and really tough
interviews in Russian. Once COVID lifts a little bit, I'm traveling to Russia. And I'll keep your
advice in mind that the limitations is a kind of superpower. We should use it to our advantage,
because you do feel less like you're not able to convey your wisdom in the Russian language.
Because I moved here when I was 13. So you don't, you know, the parts of life you live under a
certain language are the parts of life you're able to communicate. You know, I became, I became a
thoughtful, deeply thoughtful human in English. But the pain from World War II, the music of the
people, that wasn't still with me in Russian. So I can carry both of those and there's limitations
in both. I can't say philosophically profound stuff in Russian, but I can't in English express
like that melancholy feeling of like the people. And so combining those two all somehow.
Oh, beautifully said. Thanks for sharing. This is great. Yes, I totally understand you. Yes.
You've accomplished some incredible things in this space of science, in a space of technology,
a space of theory and engineering. Do you have advice for somebody young, an undergraduate student,
somebody in high school or anyone who just feels young about life or about career,
about making their way in this world? So I was telling before that I believe in emotion and
my thing is to be true to your own emotion. And that I think that if you do that, you're doing
well because it's a life well spent and you are going never tire because you want to solve all
these emotional knots that have always intrigued you from the beginning. And I really believe that
to live meaningfully, creatively, and yet to live your emotional life. So I really believe
that whether you're a scientist or an artist even more, but a scientist, I think of them as
artists as well. If you are a human being, so you are really to live fully your emotions and
to the extent possible, sometimes emotions can be overbearing. And my advice is try to
express them with more and more confidence. Sometimes it's hard, but you are going to be
much more fulfilled by suppressing them. What about love? One of the big ones? What role does
that play? That's the bigger part of emotions. It's a scary thing. It's a lot of vulnerability
that comes with love, but there is also so much energy and power and love in all senses,
and in the traditional sense, but also in the sense of a broader sense for humanity,
this feeling, this compassion that makes us one with other people and the suffering of other
people. I mean, all of this is a very scary stuff, but it's really the fabric of life.
Well, the sad thing is it really hurts to lose it.
Yes, that's why the vulnerability that comes with it.
That's the thing about emotion is it's up and down, and the down seems to come always with up,
but the up only comes with the down. Let me ask you about the ultimate down, which is,
unfortunately, we humans are mortal or appear to be for the most part. Do you think about your
own mortality? Do you fear death? I hope so, because without death there is no life,
so at least there is no meaningful life. Death is actually, in some sense, our ultimate motivator
to live a beautiful and meaningful life. I myself felt as a young man, unless I got something that
I wanted to do and I don't know why I got the idea of something to say. If I'm not able to say,
I would suicide. Maybe it was a way to motivate myself, but you don't need to motivate it because
in some sense, unfortunately, death is there. You better get up and do your thing,
because death is the best motivation to live fully. What do you hope your legacy is?
Do you imagine you have two kids? Yes. I really feel that on one side is
my biological legacy, and that is my two kids and their kids, hopefully, and that is one fine.
The other thing is this common enterprise, which is society, and I really feel that my legacy would
be better by providing security and privacy. Actually, for me, our metaphorical, to say I want
to give you the ability to interact more and take more risks and reach out to more and more people
as difficult and dangerous as they may seem, but my own scientific work is about to guarantee
privacy and give you the security of interaction. Not only in a transaction, like it would be a
blockchain transaction, but that is really one of the hardcore of my emotional problems. I think
of it and these are the problems I want to tackle. Ultimately, privacy and security is freedom.
Freedom is at the core of this. It's dangerous. It's like the emotion thing,
but ultimately, that's how we create all the beautiful things around us. Do you think there's
meaning to it all? This life except the urgency that death provides and us anxious beings create
cool stuff along the way. Is there a deeper meaning? If it is, what is it? Well, meaning of life.
Actually, there are three meanings of life. Great. That's great. One, to seek. Two, to seek, and three,
to seek. To seek what? Or is there no answer to that? There's no answer to that. I really think
that the journey is more and more important than the destination, whatever that be. I think that
is a journey and in my opinion, at the end of the day, it must admit meaningful in itself.
We must admit that maybe whatever your destination might be, we may never get there,
but hell was a great ride. Well, I don't think there's a better way to end this,
Silvio. Thank you for wasting your extremely valuable time with me today, joining on this journey
of seeking something together. We found nothing, but it was very fun. I really enjoyed it. Thank
you so much for talking to us today. Thank you, Alex. It was really special for me to be interviewed
by you. Thank you for listening to this conversation with Silvio McCauley, and thank you to our
sponsors, Athletic Greens Nutrition Drink, the Information in Depth Tech Journalism website,
FourSigmatic Mushroom Coffee, and BetterHelp Online Therapy. Click the sponsor links to
get a discount and to support this podcast. And now, let me leave you with some words from
Henry David Thoreau. Wealth is the ability to fully experience life. Thank you for listening,
and hope to see you next time.